docs: update fdfitting.rst (#405)
lumicks/pylake: docs/tutorial/fdfitting.rst

    :nbexport:`Download this page as a Jupyter notebook <self>`

Pylake is capable of fitting force extension curves using various polymer models. This tutorial introduces these fitting capabilities.

Models
------
Pylake has several models implemented that can be used for fitting force extension data. For a full list of models invokie `help(lk.fitting.models)`

> or see :ref:`fd_models`. For example, a model that is frequently used for fitting force extension data of dsDNA is the so-called

Reviewer: You can ignore this if it has been mentioned already elsewhere
```suggestion
or see :ref:`fd_models`. For example, a model that is frequently used for fitting force extension data of double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) is the so-called
```

    Name      Value  Unit      Fitted      Lower bound    Upper bound
    ------  -------  --------  --------  -------------  -------------
    DNA/Lp    40     [nm]      True              0.001            100
    DNA/Lc    16     [micron]  True            0.00034            inf
    DNA/St  1500     [pN]      True                  1            inf
    kT         4.11  [pN*nm]   False              3.77              8

As we can see from the model equation, the model is given as distance as a function of force.
Note also how the model name is prefixed to the model specific parameters, forming a key-value pair like so: `"name/parameter": value`. For example, the persistence length in this model
is now named `DNA/Lp`.

> kT does not have `DNA` prefixed, because this parameter is not model specific (the parameter represents the Boltzmann constant times the temperature).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kT does not have `DNA` prefixed since it represents the product of the Boltzmann constant times the temperature, and is therefore not model specific.
```

    dna = lk.ewlc_odijk_distance("DNA")
    force = np.arange(0.1, 14, 0.1)
    distance = dna(force, {"DNA/Lp": 50.0, "DNA/Lc": 16.0, "DNA/St": 1500.0, "kT": 4.11})
    plt.plot(distance,force)
    plt.ylabel('Force')
    plt.xlabel('Distance')

Model composition and inversion
-------------------------------

Above, we investigated a model with distance as a function of force. In practice, the force is typically fitted as a function of distance. This can be done using :func:`lk.ewlc_odijk_force() <lumicks.pylake.ewlc_odijk_force()>`::

    model = lk.ewlc_odijk_force("DNA")

Let's assume we have acquired data, but upon analysis
we notice that the template matching wasn't completely optimal. In addition, we experienced some force drift, while
forgetting to reset the force back to zero. In this case, we can incorporate offsets in our model. We can introduce an

> offset in the independent parameter, by calling `.subtract_independent_offset()` on our model::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
offset in the independent parameter, by calling :meth:`.subtract_independent_offset() <lumicks.pylake.fitting.model.Model.subtract_independent_offset()>` on our model::
```

    dna = lk.ewlc_odijk_distance("DNA")
    force = np.arange(0.1, 14, 0.1)
    distance = dna(force, {"DNA/Lp": 50.0, "DNA/Lc": 16.0, "DNA/St": 1500.0, "kT": 4.11})
    plt.plot(distance,force)
    plt.ylabel("Force")
    plt.xlabel("Distance")

Model composition and inversion
-------------------------------

> Above, we investigated a model with distance as a function of force. In practice, the force is typically fitted as a function of distance. This can be done using :func:`lk.ewlc_odijk_force() <lumicks.pylake.ewlc_odijk_force()>`::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Above, we investigate a model with distance as a function of force. In practice, the force is typically fitted as a function of distance. This can be done using :func:`lk.ewlc_odijk_force() <lumicks.pylake.ewlc_odijk_force()>`::
```

    model = lk.ewlc_odijk_force("DNA")

> Let's assume we have acquired data, but upon analysis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's assume we have acquired data, and upon analysis
```

    Name            Value  Unit      Fitted      Lower bound    Upper bound
    ------------  -------  --------  --------  -------------  -------------
    DNA/d_offset     0.01  [au]      True               -0.1            0.1
    DNA/Lp          40     [nm]      True              0.001            100
    DNA/Lc          16     [micron]  True            0.00034            inf
    DNA/St        1500     [pN]      True                  1            inf
    kT               4.11  [pN*nm]   False              3.77              8
    DNA/f_offset     0.01  [pN]      True               -0.1            0.1

> Sometimes, models become more complicated. For instance, we may have two worm like chain models, one for a DNA tether and the other for an unfolded protein. The total length of the construct is then the sum of the length of the DNA and the protein and the total distance is given by::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes models become more complicated. For instance, we may have two worm-like chain models, one for a DNA tether and the other for an unfolded protein. The total length of the construct is then the sum of the length of the DNA and the protein and the total distance is given by::
```

    model = lk.ewlc_odijk_distance("DNA") + lk.ewlc_odijk_distance("protein") + lk.distance_offset("offset")
    model = model.invert()

> Note how the three models are all defined as distance as a function of force. Since fitting is best done for force as a function of distance, we then inverted the composited model. Note that models inverted via :meth:`.invert() <lumicks.pylake.fitting.model.Model.invert()>` will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note how the three models all define distance as a function of force. Since fitting is best done for force as a function of distance, we then invert the composited model. Note that models inverted via :meth:`.invert() <lumicks.pylake.fitting.model.Model.invert()>` will
```

    Name            Value  Unit      Fitted      Lower bound    Upper bound
    ------------  -------  --------  --------  -------------  -------------
    DNA/d_offset     0.01  [au]      True               -0.1            0.1
    DNA/Lp          40     [nm]      True              0.001            100
    DNA/Lc          16     [micron]  True            0.00034            inf
    DNA/St        1500     [pN]      True                  1            inf
    kT               4.11  [pN*nm]   False              3.77              8
    DNA/f_offset     0.01  [pN]      True               -0.1            0.1

> Sometimes, models become more complicated. For instance, we may have two worm like chain models that we wish to add, and then invert. For the Odijk model, this can be

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it would make sense to discuss when you'd add them by distance (construct) and when you'd add them by force (multiple tethers).

Author: It would indeed be good to elaborate on that somewhere. Maybe that would fit in a theory section, rather than a tutorial?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, fair enough. That makes sense. Might still make sense to mention that you add by distances (length)? It is something a user might run into, if they try to add a force to a distance or vice versa.

Author: I added an explanation on why methods are added in terms of distance. I do feel that this particular topic deserves an extra theory section, but we can add that when there is time.

done as follows::

    model = lk.ewlc_odijk_distance("DNA") + lk.ewlc_odijk_distance("protein") + lk.distance_offset("offset")
    model = model.invert()

> Note how we added three models and then inverted the composition of those models. Models inverted via `invert()` will

Reviewer 2: Now that we have API docs, it would be nice to link the docs page for `.invert()` here.
```suggestion
Note how we added three models and then inverted the composition of those models. Models inverted via :meth:`.invert() <lumicks.pylake.fitting.model.Model.invert()>` will
```

typically fit slower than the pre-inverted counterparts. This is because the inversion is done numerically rather than

> analytically. For example, using `lk.ewlc_odijk_force` would be faster to use than `lk.ewlc_odijk_distance.invert()`. For more complex examples on how this inversion may be used, please see the examples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
analytically. For example, using :func:`lk.ewlc_odijk_force() <lumicks.pylake.ewlc_odijk_force()>` would be faster to use than `lk.ewlc_odijk_distance.invert()`. For more complex examples on how this inversion may be used, please see the examples.
```

minimizing the least squares differences between the model's dependent variable and the data in the
fit::

    fit.fit()

Plotting the results of the fit
--------------------------------
Plot the result of the fit::

    fit.plot()
    plt.ylabel("Force [pN]")
    plt.xlabel("Distance [$\\mu$M]");
    plt.title("After fitting")

If you wish to customize the label that appears in the legend, you can pass a custom `label` as an additional argument::

    fit.plot(label="my_fit")

Sometimes, we want to plot the model over a range of
values (in this case values from 2.0 to 5.0) for the conditions corresponding to the `Control` and `RecA` data. We can
do this as follows::

    fit.plot("Control", "k--", np.arange(2.0, 5.0, 0.01))
    fit.plot("RecA", "k--", np.arange(2.0, 5.0, 0.01))

Plot the fitted model without data::

    fit.plot("Control", "k--", np.arange(2.0, 5.0, 0.01), plot_data=False)

It is also possible to obtain simulations from the model directly, using the fitted parameters::

    distance = np.arange(2.0, 5.0, 0.01)
    simulated_force = model(distance, fit["Control"])
    plt.plot(distance, simulated_force)

> Here `fit["Control"]` grabs the parameters needed to simulate the condition corresponding to the dataset with the name "Control".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here `fit["Control"]` grabs the parameters needed to simulate the condition corresponding to the dataset with the name `"Control"`.
```

parameters and fit them. We construct it using `lk.FdFit` and pass it one or more models. In
return, we get an object we can interact with, which in this case we store in `fit`::

    model = lk.ewlc_odijk_force("DNA")
    fit = lk.FdFit(model)

Adding data to the fit
**********************

To do a fit, we have to add data. Let's assume we have two data sets. One was acquired in the presence of a ligand, and
another was measured without a ligand. We expect this ligand to only affect the contour length of our DNA. Let's add the

> first data set which we name `Control`. Since the extensible worm-like chain works up to 30 pN, we select forces < 30pN::

Author: I agree, changed it.

confidence interval::

    fit["model/Lc"].ci(0.95)

Note that the bounds returned by this call are only asymptotically correct and should be used with caution. *Better
confidence intervals can be obtained using the profile likelihood method* :cite:`raue2009structural,maiwald2016driving`.
Determining confidence intervals via profiles has two big advantages:

- The confidence intervals no longer depend on the parametrization of the model (for more information on this see :cite:`maiwald2016driving`).
- By inspecting the profile, we can diagnose problems with the model we are using.

Profiles can easily be computed by calling :func:`~lumicks.pylake.FdFit.profile_likelihood` on the fit::

    profile = fit.profile_likelihood("model/Lc", num_steps=1000)
    
The lower and upper bound of the 95% confidence interval of the given parameter (`Lc` in this example) can be obtained as::

    [profile.lower_bound, profile.upper_bound] # [lower bound, upper bound]

Note that these profiles require iterative computation and are therefore time consuming to produce.
For a well parametrized model with sufficient data, a profile plot results in a (near) parabolic shape, where the line

> of the parabola intersects with the confidence interval lines (dashed). The confidence intervals are then determined to

Author: I think it is better not to emphasize that. We explain a few lines above that using the likelihood profile has advantages. Users don't know in advance whether they will get a well defined profile or not, so it is just better to stick to this method.

> of the parabola intersects with the confidence interval lines (dashed). The confidence intervals are then determined to

Author: Btw, I asked for other unfolding data then AdK. We have hairpin data, but that unfolding event is rather small and not well visible on the low resolution fd curves. The demolab does not have any other protein unfolding data that can be shared. The nucleosome unwrapping data are too complicated and don't fit well as only Lc changes.

> of the parabola intersects with the confidence interval lines (dashed). The confidence intervals are then determined to

Reviewer 2: > We explain a few lines above that using the likelihood profile has advantages. Users don't know in advance whether they will get a well defined profile or not, so it is just better to stick to this method.

I agree that they are better. But one reason could be that profiles are a lot slower and may become prohibitively slow in fits with many datasets and complex inverted models. But anyway, I agree, it probably takes away from the tutorial nature of the section.

offset, we can observe that the two are related. To produce the following figure, we set a lower bound and upper bound
of -0.1 and 0.1 for the distance respectively. We can see that the profile is perfectly flat until the distance reaches
the bound. Only then does the profile suddenly jump.

.. image:: profile_bad.png

What this shows is that a change in one parameter (`model/Lc`) can be compensated by a change in the other. This
highlights the importance of constraining distance offset parameters when trying to estimate an absolute contour length.
In this sample case, fixing the distance offset to zero recovers the parabolic profile from before.

Adding many data sets
*********************

Sometimes, you may want to add multiple data sets for one condition, to perform a global fit.
Consider two lists of distance and force vectors stored in `distances` and `forces`::

    file_adk1 = lk.File("Data\\adk5_curve1.h5")
    d_adk1 = file_adk1.fdcurves['adk5_curve1'].d['0s':'13s'].data
    f_adk1 = file_adk1.fdcurves['adk5_curve1'].f['0s':'13s'].data

    file_adk2 = lk.File("Data\\adk5_curve2.h5")

>     d_adk2 = file_adk2.fdcurves['adk5_curve2']['0s':'13s'].d.data
>     f_adk2 = file_adk2.fdcurves['adk5_curve2']['0s':'13s'].f.data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    d_adk2 = file_adk2.fdcurves["adk5_curve2"]["0s":"13s"].d.data
    f_adk2 = file_adk2.fdcurves["adk5_curve2"]["0s":"13s"].f.data
```

Multiple models
***************

Sometimes, you need to fit multiple models, for example before and after unfolding of a protein.
Let’s say we have two models, `model1` and `model2` and we want to fit both in a global fit.
The first step is to constructing the :class:`~lumicks.pylake.FdFit`::

    model1 = lk.ewlc_odijk_force("DNA")
    model2 = (lk.ewlc_odijk_distance("DNA") + lk.ewlc_odijk_distance("protein")).invert()
    fit = lk.FdFit(model1, model2)

First, we add fd data from before the unfolding event from two different measurements:::

    for i, (distance, force) in enumerate(zip(distances, forces)):
        fit[model1].add_data(f"Before unfolding {i}", force, distance)

See how we used the model handles? They are used to let the :class:`~lumicks.pylake.FdFit` know to which model each data set should be added.
Rather then directly adding the data from after the unfolding event, and fitting everything together, we are going to fit in incrementally::

    fit.fit()

Next, add data after unfolding to `fit[model2]`::

    d_adk1 = file_adk1.fdcurves['adk5_curve1'].d['21s':'29s'].data
    f_adk1 = file_adk1.fdcurves['adk5_curve1'].f['21s':'29s'].data

>     d_adk2 = file_adk2.fdcurves['adk5_curve2']['20s':'29s'].d.data
>     f_adk2 = file_adk2.fdcurves['adk5_curve2']['20s':'29s'].f.data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    d_adk2 = file_adk2.fdcurves["adk5_curve2"]["20s":"29s"].d.data
    f_adk2 = file_adk2.fdcurves["adk5_curve2"]["20s":"29s"].f.data
```

    distances2 = [d_adk1, d_adk2]
    forces2 = [f_adk1, f_adk2]

    for i, (distance, force) in enumerate(zip(distances2, forces2)):

>         fit[model2].add_data(f"After unfolding {i}", force[distance>0], distance[distance>0])

Reviewer 2: There's data with negative distance? Is this due to noise, or does the average distance actually go negative?

Author: The distance is actually always positive (the >0 part was copy-pasted from the AdK Notebook on Harbor). I removed  ' `[distance>0]` '

Author: Update: The distance is always positive _or_ 0. So the >0 statement was there to remove the distance = 0 datapoints, resulting from bad camera tracking. I put the >0 back, but at a different location, right when `distances` and `forces` are defined.

Reviewer 2: Right, that makes sense. But it should probably be mentioned in the text somewhere, since it's something that may surprise someone.

Multiple models
***************

Sometimes, you need to fit multiple models, for example before and after unfolding of a protein.
Let’s say we have two models, `model1` and `model2` and we want to fit both in a global fit.
The first step is to construct the :class:`~lumicks.pylake.FdFit`::

    model1 = lk.ewlc_odijk_force("DNA")
    model2 = (lk.ewlc_odijk_distance("DNA") + lk.ewlc_odijk_distance("protein")).invert()
    fit = lk.FdFit(model1, model2)

We add force-distance data from before the unfolding event from two different measurements:::

    for i, (distance, force) in enumerate(zip(distances, forces)):
        fit[model1].add_data(f"Before unfolding {i}", force, distance)

See how we used the model handles? They are used to let the :class:`~lumicks.pylake.FdFit` know to which model each data set should be added.

> Rather then directly adding the data from after the unfolding event, and fitting everything together, we are going to fit in incrementally::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rather than directly adding the data from after the unfolding event, and fitting everything together, we are going to fit incrementally::
```

    fit.fit()

Next, add data after unfolding to `fit[model2]`::

    d_adk1 = file_adk1.fdcurves["adk5_curve1"].d["21s":"29s"].data
    f_adk1 = file_adk1.fdcurves["adk5_curve1"].f["21s":"29s"].data

    d_adk2 = file_adk2.fdcurves["adk5_curve2"]["20s":"29s"].d.data
    f_adk2 = file_adk2.fdcurves["adk5_curve2"]["20s":"29s"].f.data

    distances2 = [d_adk1[d_adk1 > 0], d_adk2[d_adk2 > 0]]
    forces2 = [f_adk1[d_adk1 > 0], f_adk2[d_adk2 > 0]]

    for i, (distance, force) in enumerate(zip(distances2, forces2)):
        fit[model2].add_data(f"After unfolding {i}", force, distance)

Next, we fit the data after the unfolding event. To speed up the computation, we fix the parameters that we already fitted::

    fit["DNA/Lc"].fixed = True
    fit["DNA/Lp"].fixed = True
    fit["DNA/St"].fixed = True

    fit["protein/Lp"].value = .7
    fit["protein/Lp"].lower_bound = .6
    fit["protein/Lp"].upper_bound = 1.0
    fit["protein/Lc"].value = .025

    fit.fit()

Now we have fitted both the data before and after unfolding. The results can be plotted as follows::

    fit[model1].plot()
    fit[model2].plot()

> Accessing the model parameters for a specific data set is a little more complicated in this setting. If we want to obtain the parameters for “data for model 1”, we’d have to invoke::

Reviewer 2: I'm unsure about this one, but shouldn't this be:
```suggestion
Accessing the model parameters for a specific data set is a little more complicated in this setting. If we want to obtain the parameters for `“Before unfolding 1”`, we’d have to invoke::
```
